---
layout: post
title:  "Linear System Theory （Part I, Foundations)"
date:   2023-08-28
desc: "LST"
keywords: "Control & dynamics"
categories: [Control & dynamics]
tags: [Control & dynamics]
icon: icon-html
---

# INTRODUCTION TO LINEAR SYSTEM THEORY

> **_Keypoints:_**  

- [INTRODUCTION TO LINEAR SYSTEM THEORY](#introduction-to-linear-system-theory)
  - [Linear Dynamical System Representation](#linear-dynamical-system-representation)
  - [Linearization and LTI State Equation Solutions](#linearization-and-lti-state-equation-solutions)
  - [LTI Response Properties: Transfer Function Poles and Zeros](#lti-response-properties-transfer-function-poles-and-zeros)
  - [LTI Response Properties: Steady-State Frequency Response](#lti-response-properties-steady-state-frequency-response)
  - [LTI Response Properties: Matrix Forms](#lti-response-properties-matrix-forms)

**_This file is based on ME 530.616 Introduction to Linear Systems Theory by Prof. Louis Whitcomb_**

## Linear Dynamical System Representation

- Linear Function: The function $f$ is linear if and only if $f(x+y)=f(x)+f(y)$ and $f(ax)=af(x)$.

- Linear Dynamical System Representations:
  - Convolution Integral
  - Laplace Transform
  - n-th Order Differential Equation
  - n-dimensional State Space Representation
    - LTV: Linear Time-Varying
    $\dot x(t)=A(t)x(t)+B(t)u(t)$
    $y(t)=C(t)x(t)+D(t)u(t)$
    - LTI: Linear Time-Invariant
    **$\dot x(t)=Ax(t)+Bu(t)$
    $y(t)=Cx(t)+Du(t)$, where $A,B,C,D$ are constant matrices.**

- Important questions about linear dynamical systems:
  - Boundeness: Do all signals remain bounded?
  - Stability: Do all signals converge to zero?
  - Controllability: Can we drive the system to any state?
  - Observability: Can we determine the state from the output?
  - Realization: Given an input-output map, can we find a state-space representation?

## Linearization and LTI State Equation Solutions

- Linear approximation of nonlinear dynamical system at an equilibrium point: the **second-order Taylor series expansion of the nonlinear function $f$ about the equilibrium point $(x_0,u_0)$**.
  - $\dot x=f(x,u)$
  $f(x,u)=f(x_0,u_0)+\frac{\partial f}{\partial x}|_{x=x_0,u=u_0}(x-x_0)+\frac{\partial f}{\partial u}|_{x=x_0,u=u_0}(u-u_0)+\mathcal{O}(\|x-x_0\|^2+\|u-u_0\|^2)$
  $\dot x=A(x-x_0)+B(u-u_0)+\mathcal{O}$, where $A=\frac{\partial f}{\partial x}|_{x=x_0,u=u_0}$ and $B=\frac{\partial f}{\partial u}|_{x=x_0,u=u_0}$.
  - Stability of linearized system: the real parts $\lambda_i$ of the eigenvalues of $A$ determine the stability of the linearized system.
    - **All negative: asymptotically stable**
    - Some zero: indeterminate
      - $Re(\lambda_i)=0$, and algebraic multiplicity=geometric multiplicity: marginally stable
    - **Any positive: unstable**

- LTI State Equation Solutions:
  - Zero-input case: $u(t)=0$
    - $\dot x=Ax$
    $x(t)=e^{At}x(0)=\sum_{i=0}^{\infty}\frac{A^it^i}{i!}x(0)$
    - $e^{At}=\mathcal{L}^{-1}[(sI-A)^{-1}]$
  - Nonzero-input case: $u(t)\neq 0$
    - $\dot x=Ax+Bu$
    $x(t)=e^{At}x(0)+\int_0^te^{A(t-\tau)}Bu(\tau)d\tau$


## LTI Response Properties: Transfer Function Poles and Zeros

$u(s) \rightarrow G(s) \rightarrow y(s)$, where $G(s)$ is the transfer function i.e **$G(s)=\frac{Y(s)}{U(s)}$**.

- Time domain state space representation: $\dot x=Ax+Bu$, $y=Cx+Du$
- Frequency domain transfer function representation: 
  - **$G(s)=C(sI-A)^{-1}B+D$**
  - $G(s)=\frac{n(s)}{d(s)} + D = \frac{b_ms^m+b_{m-1}s^{m-1}+...+b_1s+b_0}{s^n+a_{n-1}s^{n-1}+...+a_1s+a_0} + D$
  - **Poles** are the roots of the denominator polynomial $d(s)$, and **zeros** are the roots of the numerator polynomial $n(s)$.
  - Poles are the eigenvalues of $A$, but eigenvalues of $A$ are not necessarily poles of $G(s)$ due to pole-zero cancellation. Because $(sI-A)^{-1} = \frac{adj(sI-A)}{det(sI-A)}$, and $det(sI-A)$ is the characteristic polynomial of $A$.

## LTI Response Properties: Steady-State Frequency Response

- Steady-State Response: given a LTI system with response $y(t)$ to initial condition $x(t_0)=x_0$ and input $u(t)$, the steady-state response $y_{ss}(t)$ is that function satisfying $\lim_{t\rightarrow\infty}[y(t)-y_{ss}(t)]=0$.
  - If $y_{ss}(t)$ is constant, it's regarded as the final value.
  - $y_{ss}(t)$ may not be constant.
  - $y_{ss}(t)$ may oscillate.
  - $y_{ss}(t)$ may be unbouded.
  - Final value theorem: $\lim_{t\rightarrow\infty}y(t)=\lim_{s\rightarrow 0}sY(s)$, if $\lim_{t\rightarrow\infty}y(t)$ exists and is finite.

## LTI Response Properties: Matrix Forms

- A square matrix $A$ is diagonalizable if there exists an invertible matrix $T$ such that $T^{-1}AT=\Lambda$, where $\Lambda$ is a diagonal matrix. 

- A square matrix $A$ is diagonalizable if and only if it has $n$ linearly independent eigenvectors.
- A matrix is diagonalizable if and only if all its eigenvalues $\lambda_i$, their algebraic multiplicities $m_i$, and their geometric multiplicities $g_i$ satisfy $m_i=g_i$.